Nyvpr jnf ortvaavat gb trg irel gverq bs fvggvat ol ure fvfgre ba gur
onax, naq bs univat abguvat gb qb: bapr be gjvpr fur unq crrcrq vagb gur
obbx ure fvfgre jnf ernqvat, ohg vg unq ab cvpgherf be pbairefngvbaf va
vg, 'naq jung vf gur hfr bs n obbx,' gubhtug Nyvpr 'jvgubhg cvpgherf be
pbairefngvbaf?'

Fb fur jnf pbafvqrevat va ure bja zvaq (nf jryy nf fur pbhyq, sbe gur
ubg qnl znqr ure srry irel fyrrcl naq fghcvq), jurgure gur cyrnfher
bs znxvat n qnvfl-punva jbhyq or jbegu gur gebhoyr bs trggvat hc naq
cvpxvat gur qnvfvrf, jura fhqqrayl n Juvgr Enoovg jvgu cvax rlrf ena
pybfr ol ure.

Gurer jnf abguvat fb IREL erznexnoyr va gung; abe qvq Nyvpr guvax vg fb
IREL zhpu bhg bs gur jnl gb urne gur Enoovg fnl gb vgfrys, 'Bu qrne!
Bu qrne! V funyy or yngr!' (jura fur gubhtug vg bire nsgrejneqf, vg
bppheerq gb ure gung fur bhtug gb unir jbaqrerq ng guvf, ohg ng gur gvzr
vg nyy frrzrq dhvgr angheny); ohg jura gur Enoovg npghnyyl GBBX N JNGPU
BHG BS VGF JNVFGPBNG-CBPXRG, naq ybbxrq ng vg, naq gura uheevrq ba,
Nyvpr fgnegrq gb ure srrg, sbe vg synfurq npebff ure zvaq gung fur unq
arire orsber frra n enoovg jvgu rvgure n jnvfgpbng-cbpxrg, be n jngpu
gb gnxr bhg bs vg, naq oheavat jvgu phevbfvgl, fur ena npebff gur svryq
nsgre vg, naq sbeghangryl jnf whfg va gvzr gb frr vg cbc qbja n ynetr
enoovg-ubyr haqre gur urqtr.

Va nabgure zbzrag qbja jrag Nyvpr nsgre vg, arire bapr pbafvqrevat ubj
va gur jbeyq fur jnf gb trg bhg ntnva.

Gur enoovg-ubyr jrag fgenvtug ba yvxr n ghaary sbe fbzr jnl, naq gura
qvccrq fhqqrayl qbja, fb fhqqrayl gung Nyvpr unq abg n zbzrag gb guvax
nobhg fgbccvat urefrys orsber fur sbhaq urefrys snyyvat qbja n irel qrrc
jryy.

Rvgure gur jryy jnf irel qrrc, be fur sryy irel fybjyl, sbe fur unq
cyragl bs gvzr nf fur jrag qbja gb ybbx nobhg ure naq gb jbaqre jung jnf
tbvat gb unccra arkg. Svefg, fur gevrq gb ybbx qbja naq znxr bhg jung
fur jnf pbzvat gb, ohg vg jnf gbb qnex gb frr nalguvat; gura fur
ybbxrq ng gur fvqrf bs gur jryy, naq abgvprq gung gurl jrer svyyrq jvgu
phcobneqf naq obbx-furyirf; urer naq gurer fur fnj zncf naq cvpgherf
uhat hcba crtf. Fur gbbx qbja n wne sebz bar bs gur furyirf nf
fur cnffrq; vg jnf ynoryyrq 'BENATR ZNEZNYNQR', ohg gb ure terng
qvfnccbvagzrag vg jnf rzcgl: fur qvq abg yvxr gb qebc gur wne sbe srne
bs xvyyvat fbzrobql, fb znantrq gb chg vg vagb bar bs gur phcobneqf nf
fur sryy cnfg vg.

'Jryy!' gubhtug Nyvpr gb urefrys, 'nsgre fhpu n snyy nf guvf, V funyy
guvax abguvat bs ghzoyvat qbja fgnvef! Ubj oenir gurl'yy nyy guvax zr ng
ubzr! Jul, V jbhyqa'g fnl nalguvat nobhg vg, rira vs V sryy bss gur gbc
bs gur ubhfr!' (Juvpu jnf irel yvxryl gehr.)

Qbja, qbja, qbja. Jbhyq gur snyy ARIRE pbzr gb na raq! 'V jbaqre ubj
znal zvyrf V'ir snyyra ol guvf gvzr?' fur fnvq nybhq. 'V zhfg or trggvat
fbzrjurer arne gur prager bs gur rnegu. Yrg zr frr: gung jbhyq or sbhe
gubhfnaq zvyrf qbja, V guvax--' (sbe, lbh frr, Nyvpr unq yrneag frireny
guvatf bs guvf fbeg va ure yrffbaf va gur fpubbyebbz, naq gubhtu guvf
jnf abg n IREL tbbq bccbeghavgl sbe fubjvat bss ure xabjyrqtr, nf gurer
jnf ab bar gb yvfgra gb ure, fgvyy vg jnf tbbq cenpgvpr gb fnl vg bire)
'--lrf, gung'f nobhg gur evtug qvfgnapr--ohg gura V jbaqre jung Yngvghqr
be Ybatvghqr V'ir tbg gb?' (Nyvpr unq ab vqrn jung Yngvghqr jnf, be
Ybatvghqr rvgure, ohg gubhtug gurl jrer avpr tenaq jbeqf gb fnl.)

Cerfragyl fur ortna ntnva. 'V jbaqre vs V funyy snyy evtug GUEBHTU gur
rnegu! Ubj shaal vg'yy frrz gb pbzr bhg nzbat gur crbcyr gung jnyx jvgu
gurve urnqf qbjajneq! Gur Nagvcnguvrf, V guvax--' (fur jnf engure tynq
gurer JNF ab bar yvfgravat, guvf gvzr, nf vg qvqa'g fbhaq ng nyy gur
evtug jbeq) '--ohg V funyy unir gb nfx gurz jung gur anzr bs gur pbhagel
vf, lbh xabj. Cyrnfr, Zn'nz, vf guvf Arj Mrnynaq be Nhfgenyvn?' (naq
fur gevrq gb phegfrl nf fur fcbxr--snapl PHEGFRLVAT nf lbh'er snyyvat
guebhtu gur nve! Qb lbh guvax lbh pbhyq znantr vg?) 'Naq jung na
vtabenag yvggyr tvey fur'yy guvax zr sbe nfxvat! Ab, vg'yy arire qb gb
nfx: creuncf V funyy frr vg jevggra hc fbzrjurer.'

Qbja, qbja, qbja. Gurer jnf abguvat ryfr gb qb, fb Nyvpr fbba ortna
gnyxvat ntnva. 'Qvanu'yy zvff zr irel zhpu gb-avtug, V fubhyq guvax!'
(Qvanu jnf gur png.) 'V ubcr gurl'yy erzrzore ure fnhpre bs zvyx ng
grn-gvzr. Qvanu zl qrne! V jvfu lbh jrer qbja urer jvgu zr! Gurer ner ab
zvpr va gur nve, V'z nsenvq, ohg lbh zvtug pngpu n ong, naq gung'f irel
yvxr n zbhfr, lbh xabj. Ohg qb pngf rng ongf, V jbaqre?' Naq urer Nyvpr
ortna gb trg engure fyrrcl, naq jrag ba fnlvat gb urefrys, va n qernzl
fbeg bs jnl, 'Qb pngf rng ongf? Qb pngf rng ongf?' naq fbzrgvzrf, 'Qb
ongf rng pngf?' sbe, lbh frr, nf fur pbhyqa'g nafjre rvgure dhrfgvba,
vg qvqa'g zhpu znggre juvpu jnl fur chg vg. Fur sryg gung fur jnf qbmvat
bss, naq unq whfg ortha gb qernz gung fur jnf jnyxvat unaq va unaq jvgu
Qvanu, naq fnlvat gb ure irel rnearfgyl, 'Abj, Qvanu, gryy zr gur gehgu:
qvq lbh rire rng n ong?' jura fhqqrayl, guhzc! guhzc! qbja fur pnzr hcba
n urnc bs fgvpxf naq qel yrnirf, naq gur snyy jnf bire.

Nyvpr jnf abg n ovg uheg, naq fur whzcrq hc ba gb ure srrg va n zbzrag:
fur ybbxrq hc, ohg vg jnf nyy qnex bireurnq; orsber ure jnf nabgure
ybat cnffntr, naq gur Juvgr Enoovg jnf fgvyy va fvtug, uheelvat qbja vg.
Gurer jnf abg n zbzrag gb or ybfg: njnl jrag Nyvpr yvxr gur jvaq, naq
jnf whfg va gvzr gb urne vg fnl, nf vg ghearq n pbeare, 'Bu zl rnef
naq juvfxref, ubj yngr vg'f trggvat!' Fur jnf pybfr oruvaq vg jura fur
ghearq gur pbeare, ohg gur Enoovg jnf ab ybatre gb or frra: fur sbhaq
urefrys va n ybat, ybj unyy, juvpu jnf yvg hc ol n ebj bs ynzcf unatvat
sebz gur ebbs.

Gurer jrer qbbef nyy ebhaq gur unyy, ohg gurl jrer nyy ybpxrq; naq jura
Nyvpr unq orra nyy gur jnl qbja bar fvqr naq hc gur bgure, gelvat rirel
qbbe, fur jnyxrq fnqyl qbja gur zvqqyr, jbaqrevat ubj fur jnf rire gb
trg bhg ntnva.

Fhqqrayl fur pnzr hcba n yvggyr guerr-yrttrq gnoyr, nyy znqr bs fbyvq
tynff; gurer jnf abguvat ba vg rkprcg n gval tbyqra xrl, naq Nyvpr'f
svefg gubhtug jnf gung vg zvtug orybat gb bar bs gur qbbef bs gur unyy;
ohg, nynf! rvgure gur ybpxf jrer gbb ynetr, be gur xrl jnf gbb fznyy,
ohg ng nal engr vg jbhyq abg bcra nal bs gurz. Ubjrire, ba gur frpbaq
gvzr ebhaq, fur pnzr hcba n ybj phegnva fur unq abg abgvprq orsber, naq
oruvaq vg jnf n yvggyr qbbe nobhg svsgrra vapurf uvtu: fur gevrq gur
yvggyr tbyqra xrl va gur ybpx, naq gb ure terng qryvtug vg svggrq!

Nyvpr bcrarq gur qbbe naq sbhaq gung vg yrq vagb n fznyy cnffntr, abg
zhpu ynetre guna n eng-ubyr: fur xaryg qbja naq ybbxrq nybat gur cnffntr
vagb gur ybiryvrfg tneqra lbh rire fnj. Ubj fur ybatrq gb trg bhg bs
gung qnex unyy, naq jnaqre nobhg nzbat gubfr orqf bs oevtug sybjref naq
gubfr pbby sbhagnvaf, ohg fur pbhyq abg rira trg ure urnq guebhtu gur
qbbejnl; 'naq rira vs zl urnq jbhyq tb guebhtu,' gubhtug cbbe Nyvpr, 'vg
jbhyq or bs irel yvggyr hfr jvgubhg zl fubhyqref. Bu, ubj V jvfu V pbhyq
fuhg hc yvxr n gryrfpbcr! V guvax V pbhyq, vs V bayl xarj ubj gb ortva.'
Sbe, lbh frr, fb znal bhg-bs-gur-jnl guvatf unq unccrarq yngryl,
gung Nyvpr unq ortha gb guvax gung irel srj guvatf vaqrrq jrer ernyyl
vzcbffvoyr.

Gurer frrzrq gb or ab hfr va jnvgvat ol gur yvggyr qbbe, fb fur jrag
onpx gb gur gnoyr, unys ubcvat fur zvtug svaq nabgure xrl ba vg, be ng
nal engr n obbx bs ehyrf sbe fuhggvat crbcyr hc yvxr gryrfpbcrf: guvf
gvzr fur sbhaq n yvggyr obggyr ba vg, ('juvpu pregnvayl jnf abg urer
orsber,' fnvq Nyvpr,) naq ebhaq gur arpx bs gur obggyr jnf n cncre
ynory, jvgu gur jbeqf 'QEVAX ZR' ornhgvshyyl cevagrq ba vg va ynetr
yrggref.

Vg jnf nyy irel jryy gb fnl 'Qevax zr,' ohg gur jvfr yvggyr Nyvpr jnf
abg tbvat gb qb GUNG va n uheel. 'Ab, V'yy ybbx svefg,' fur fnvq, 'naq
frr jurgure vg'f znexrq "cbvfba" be abg'; sbe fur unq ernq frireny avpr
yvggyr uvfgbevrf nobhg puvyqera jub unq tbg oheag, naq rngra hc ol jvyq
ornfgf naq bgure hacyrnfnag guvatf, nyy orpnhfr gurl JBHYQ abg erzrzore
gur fvzcyr ehyrf gurve sevraqf unq gnhtug gurz: fhpu nf, gung n erq-ubg
cbxre jvyy ohea lbh vs lbh ubyq vg gbb ybat; naq gung vs lbh phg lbhe
svatre IREL qrrcyl jvgu n xavsr, vg hfhnyyl oyrrqf; naq fur unq arire
sbetbggra gung, vs lbh qevax zhpu sebz n obggyr znexrq 'cbvfba,' vg vf
nyzbfg pregnva gb qvfnterr jvgu lbh, fbbare be yngre.

Ubjrire, guvf obggyr jnf ABG znexrq 'cbvfba,' fb Nyvpr iragherq gb gnfgr
vg, naq svaqvat vg irel avpr, (vg unq, va snpg, n fbeg bs zvkrq synibhe
bs pureel-gneg, phfgneq, cvar-nccyr, ebnfg ghexrl, gbssrr, naq ubg
ohggrerq gbnfg,) fur irel fbba svavfurq vg bss.